5.... Nowadays, one states the
obvious in saying that
English is a global language
and that it has become the
effective lingua franca of
the world: anyone who wishes to get on
in life needs English and, increasingly,
specialised teaching of the language
reflects a growing discrimination
among its users. There is English for
work (ESP), for study at school (CLIL)
and university (EAP) and to
communicate with other non-native
speakers of English (ELF).
Living in two worlds
Increasingly, many non-native speakers
need to inhabit two worlds: one
determined by their native language(s)
and one by English. It is with this
consideration in mind that English
language teachers need to help their
learners not merely to develop mastery
of the language, but also to build a
vision of themselves operating in this
other world. Such an approach should
be both functional and directed toward
some purpose, but also imaginative and
open-ended, one in which the learners
are helped to create and develop the
new identities that they have chosen
and to perform ever more effectively
the roles that they expect to play.
A second-language self
What does this mean? Well, in the same
way that our brain strives to create a
plausible sense of self from its
continuous stream of experience, so we
should conceive of second language
learning as an attempt to produce a
new persona, defined linguistically and
culturally by new parameters, creating
what Csilla Jaray-Benn terms a
self-image where the learner ‘exists
through the foreign language’. Some of
these parameters will be consciously
and/or explicitly embraced, others will
be acquired implicitly and/or
unconsciously; in either case, the goal
towards which practice is aimed will be
a coherent whole, not a series of
unconnected targets. The repetition of
discrete items and of composite skills
will be necessary, but the focus will be
on self-realisation: the learner will be
seen as engaged in rehearsal for the
part in which they have cast
themselves. In other words, practice
will be seen as a continuously creative
activity which rests on accumulated
data, exploited for the purpose of
producing a new voice which the
learners will, in Jaray-Benn’s words,
‘build ... from inside’ and ‘nourish ...
with their past experiences and future
aspirations’. Such an approach will
encourage the learner to play a distinct
role, both authentic (in the sense of
true to oneself) and make-believe (in
that it constitutes an imaginative
enterprise). This sort of exercise, of
inhabiting fictitious worlds, as it were,
is a key element of how children learn
their first language, which is why Guy
Cook believes that games and stories
should play a major part in second
language learning for adults too.
On a neurological level, according to
Brian McWhinney, the network in which
this emerging second language persona is
grounded is initially parasitic on the first
language network, but gradually
develops as a second system which
begins to have a life of its own, in a
leading as well as a dependent capacity.
Realising the secondlanguage
self
Drawing on Zoltán Dörnyei’s L2
Motivational Self System, Jill Hadfield
outlines a programme for realising this
ideal second-language self. It consists of
three elements: an initial induction
module, followed by ‘two ongoing, parallel
processes, “Operationalising the Vision” and
“Keeping the Vision Alive”’, which are
‘designed to keep the visions fresh and vivid
in the learners’ minds’. Hadfield then goes
on to mention some of the activities this
might involve, such as building up a penpal
network, undertaking tasks in the L2
community and taking part in chat-room
discussions. These activities should aim to
‘use the L2 in real-life virtual or simulated
situations’ and should involve ‘targeted
visualisations of the students coping
successfully in various L2 situations’. At the
same time, she is careful to point out that
these modules should only constitute one
element of a language learning course, the
rest of which will be devoted to the more
typical ‘day-to-day business of doing
grammar exercises and writing essays’.
Rehearsing the target
language
Such an approach is of particular
relevance in the business context, where
performing effectively in English is
often a necessary professional skill.
When senior executives have to prepare
for international meetings with
colleagues, key customers or main
suppliers, they often undertake one-toone
intensive English courses
beforehand. With purposes of this kind
in mind, it is essential that teachers
provide real-life practice in which their
learners rehearse the target-language
role that they will have to play out in
the near future. Within the template
shown at the end of this article, the
learner outlines the overall setting,
giving reasons for the meeting, and
provides relevant details. They then
define their own needs, objectives and
strategies for the forthcoming meeting
and draw up what they feel is an
appropriate list of the same for their
opposite number, who must understand
and be able to articulate these points.
When the situation is clear, the
simulation begins: the learner plays